I was standing on the bank of the Goltva and waiting for the ferry from the
other side. Ordinarily the Goltva is a middling sort of stream, silent and
pensive, sparkling meekly through the thick bulrushes, but now a whole
lake was spread before me. The spring waters had broken loose, overflowed
both banks and flooded far out on both sides, covering kitchen gardens,
hayfields and marshes, so that you often came upon poplars and bushes
sticking up solitarily above the surface of the water, looking like grim rocks
in the darkness.
The weather seemed magnificent to me. It was dark, but I could still see
trees, water, people … The world was lit by the stars, which were strewn
massively across the sky. I do not recall ever having seen so many stars.
You literally could not put a finger between them. There were some as big
as goose eggs, some as tiny as hempseed … For the sake of the festive
parade, all of them, from small to large, had come out in the sky, washed,
renewed, joyful, and all of them to the last one quietly moved their rays.
The sky was reflected in the water; the stars bathed in the dark depths and
trembled with their light rippling. The air was warm and still … Far away
on the other side, in the impenetrable darkness, a few scattered fires burned
bright red …
Two steps away from me darkened the silhouette of a peasant in a tall hat
and with a stout, knotty stick.
“There’s been no ferry for a long while now,” I said.
“It’s time it came,” the silhouette replied.
“Are you also waiting for the ferry?”
“No, I’m just …” the peasant yawned, “waiting for the lumination. I’d
have gone, but, to tell the truth, I haven’t got the five kopecks for the ferry”
“I’ll give you five kopecks.”
“No, thank you kindly … You use those five kopecks to light a candle
for me in the monastery … That’ll be curiouser, and I’ll just stay here.
Mercy me, no ferry! As if it sank!”
The peasant went right down to the water, took hold of the cable, and
called out:
“Ieronym! Ierony-y-ym!”
As if in answer to his shout, the drawn-out tolling of a big bell came from
the other side. The tolling was dense, low, as from the thickest string of a
double bass: it seemed that the darkness itself had groaned. All at once a
cannon shot rang out. It rolled through the darkness and ended somewhere
far behind my back. The peasant took off his hat and crossed himself.
“Christ is risen!”1 he said.
Before the waves from the first stroke of the bell congealed in the air, a
second was heard, and immediately after it a third, and the darkness was
filled with an incessant, trembling sound. New lights flared up by the red
fires, and they all started moving, flickering restlessly.
“Ierony-y-ym!” a muted, drawn-out call was heard.
“They’re calling from the other side,” said the peasant. “That means the
ferry’s not there either. Our Ieronym’s asleep.”
The lights and the velvety ringing of the bell were enticing … I was
beginning to lose patience and become agitated, but then, finally, as I
peered into the dark distance, I saw the silhouette of something that looked
very much like a gallows. It was the long-awaited ferry. It was moving so
slowly that if it had not been for the gradual sharpening of its outline, one
might have thought it was standing in place or moving towards the other
shore.
“Quick! Ieronym!” my peasant shouted. “A gentleman’s waiting!”
The ferry crept up to the bank, lurched, and creaked to a stop. On it,
holding the cable, stood a tall man in a monk’s habit and a conical hat.
“Why so long?” I asked, jumping aboard the ferry.
“Forgive me, for the sake of Christ,” Ieronym said softly. “Is there
anybody else?”
“Nobody …”
Ieronym took hold of the cable with both hands, curved himself into a
question mark, and grunted. The ferry creaked and lurched. The silhouette
of the peasant in the tall hat slowly began to recede from me—which meant
that the ferry was moving. Soon Ieronym straightened up and began
working with one hand. We were silent and looked at the bank towards
which we were now moving. There the “lumination” which the peasant had
been waiting for was already beginning. At the water’s edge, barrels of
pitch blazed like huge bonfires. Their reflection, crimson as the rising
moon, crept to meet us in long, wide stripes. The burning barrels threw light
on their own smoke and on the long human shadows that flitted about the
fire; but further to the sides and behind them, where the velvet ringing
rushed from, was the same impenetrable darkness. Suddenly slashing it
open, the golden ribbon of a rocket soared skywards; it described an arc
and, as if shattering against the sky, burst and came sifting down in sparks.
On the bank a noise was heard resembling a distant “hoorah.”
“How beautiful!” I said.
“It’s even impossible to say how beautiful!” sighed Ieronym. “It’s that
kind of night, sir! At other times you don’t pay any attention to rockets, but
now any vain thing makes you glad. Where are you from?”
I told him where I was from.
“So, sir … a joyful day this is …” Ieronym went on in a weak, gasping
tenor, the way convalescents speak. “Heaven and earth and under the earth
rejoice. The whole of creation celebrates. Only tell me, good sir, why is it
that even amidst great joy a man can’t forget his griefs?”
It seemed to me that this unexpected question was an invitation to one of
those “longanimous,” soul-saving conversations that idle and bored monks
love so much. I was not in the mood for much talking and therefore merely
asked:
“And what are your griefs, my good man?”
“Ordinary ones, like all people have, Your Honor, but this day a
particular grief happened in the monastery: at the liturgy itself, during the
Old Testament readings, the hierodeacon Nikolai died …”
“Then it’s God’s will!” I said, shamming a monkish tone. “We all must
die. In my opinion you should even be glad … They say whoever dies on
the eve of Easter or on Easter day will surely get into the Kingdom of
Heaven.”
“That’s so.”
We fell silent. The silhouette of the peasant in the tall hat merged with
the outline of the bank. The pitch barrels flared up more and more.
“And scripture clearly points out the vanity of grief and the need for
reflection,” Ieronym broke the silence, “but what makes the soul grieve and
refuse to listen to reason? What makes you want to weep bitterly?”
Ieronym shrugged his shoulders, turned to me, and began talking quickly:
“If it was I who died or somebody else, maybe it wouldn’t be so
noticeable, but it was Nikolai who died! Nobody else but Nikolai! It’s even
hard to believe he’s no longer in the world! I stand here on the ferry and
keep thinking his voice will come from the bank any minute. He always
came down to the bank and called out to me so that I wouldn’t feel scared
on the ferry. He got out of bed in the middle of the night especially for that.
A kind soul! God, what a kind and merciful soul! Some people’s mothers
are not to them like this Nikolai was to me! Lord, save his soul!”
Ieronym took hold of the cable, but at once turned to me again.
“And such a bright mind, Your Honor!” he said in a sing-song voice.
“Such sweet, good-sounding speech! Exactly like what they’re about to
sing in the matins: ‘O how loving-kind! O how most sweet is thy word!’2
Besides all the other human qualities, he also had an extraordinary gift!”
“What gift?” I asked.
The monk looked me up and down and, as if having assured himself that
I could be entrusted with secrets, laughed gaily.
“He had the gift of writing akathists3 …” he said. “A wonder, sir, and
nothing but! You’ll be amazed if I explain it to you! Our father
archimandrite4 is from Moscow, our father vicar graduated from the Kazan
theological academy, there are intelligent hieromonks and elders among us,
and yet, just imagine, not a single one of them could write akathists, but
Nikolai, a simple monk, a hierodeacon, never studied anywhere and even
had no external appeal, and yet he wrote! A wonder. A real wonder!”
Ieronym clasped his hands and, forgetting all about the cable, went on
enthusiastically:
“Our father vicar has difficulty composing sermons; when he was writing
the history of the monastery, he got all the brothers into a sweat and went to
town ten times, but Nikolai wrote akathists! Akathists! A sermon or a
history is nothing next to that!”
“So it’s really difficult to write akathists?” I asked.
“There’s enormous difficulty…” Ieronym wagged his head. “Wisdom
and holiness won’t do anything here, if God doesn’t give you the gift.
Monks who don’t understand about it reckon you only need to know the life
of the saint you’re writing to, and then follow the other akathists. But that’s
not right, sir. Of course, a man who writes an akathist has to know the life
extremely well, to the last little point. Well, and also to follow the other
akathists, how to begin and what to write about. To give you an example,
the first kontakion begins every time with ‘the victorious’ or ‘the chosen’
… The first ikos always has to begin with angels. In the akathist to the Most
Sweet Jesus, if you’re interested, it begins like this: ‘Creator of angels and
lord of hosts,’ in the akathist to the Most Holy Mother of God: ‘An angel
was sent from heaven to stand before,’ to Saint Nicholas the
Wonderworker:5 ‘An angel in appearance, but of earthly nature,’ and so on.
There’s always an angel at the beginning. Of course, you can’t do without
following, but the main thing is not in the life, not in the correspondence
with the others, but in the beauty and sweetness. It all has to be shapely,
brief, and thorough. There should be softness, gentleness, and tenderness in
every little line, so that there’s not a single coarse, harsh, or unsuitable
word. It has to be written so that the one who is praying will rejoice and
weep in his heart, but shake and be in awe in his mind. In the akathist to the
Mother of God there are the words: ‘Rejoice, height unattainable to human
reason; rejoice, depth invisible to the eyes of angels!’ In another place in
the same akathist it says: ‘Rejoice, tree of the bright fruit on which the
faithful feed, rejoice, tree of good-shading leaves in which many find
shelter!’”
Ieronym, as if frightened or embarrassed at something, covered his face
with his hands and shook his head.
“Tree of the bright fruit … tree of good-shading leaves …” he
murmured. “He really finds such words! The Lord gave him that ability! He
puts many words and thoughts into one brief phrase, and it all comes out so
smooth and thorough! ‘Light-proffering lamp to those …’ he says in the
akathist to the Most Sweet Jesus. ‘Light-proffering!’ There’s no such word
in our speech, or in our books, and yet he thought it up, he found it in his
mind! Besides smoothness and eloquence, sir, it’s necessary that every little
line be adorned in all ways, to have flowers in it, and lightning, and wind,
and sun, and all things of the visible world. And every exclamation should
be composed so that it’s smooth and easy on the ear. ‘Rejoice, lily of
paradisal blossoming!’ it says in the akathist to Nicholas the
Wonderworker. It doesn’t say simply ‘lily of paradise,’ but ‘lily of paradisal
blossoming’! It’s sweeter and smoother on the ear. And that’s precisely
how Nikolai wrote! Precisely like that! I can’t even express to you how he
wrote!”
“In that case, it’s a pity he died,” I said. “However, my good man, let’s
get moving, otherwise we’ll be late …”
Ieronym recovered himself and rushed to the cable. On the bank all the
bells were ringing away. Probably the procession was already going around
the monastery, because the whole dark space behind the pitch barrels was
now strewn with moving lights.6
“Did Nikolai publish his akathists?” I asked Ieronym.
“Where could he publish them?” he sighed. “And it would be strange to
publish them. What for? In our monastery nobody’s interested in them.
They don’t like it. They knew Nikolai wrote them, but they paid no
attention. Nowadays, sir, nobody respects new writings!”
“Are they prejudiced against them?”
“Exactly so. If Nikolai had been an elder, the brothers might have been
curious, but he wasn’t even forty years old. There were some who laughed
and even considered his writings a sin.”
“Then why did he write?”
“More for his own delight. Of all the brothers, I was the only one who
read his akathists. I used to come to him on the quiet, so that the others
wouldn’t see, and he was glad I was interested. He embraced me, stroked
my head, called me tender words as if I were a little child. He would close
the door, sit me down next to him, and start reading …”
Ieronym left the cable and came over to me.
“We were like friends, he and I,” he whispered, looking at me with
shining eyes. “Wherever he went, I went, too. He missed me when I wasn’t
there. And he loved me more than the others, and all because I wept from
his akathists. It moves me to remember it! Now I’m like an orphan or a
widow. You know, in our monastery the people are all good, kind, pious,
but … there’s no softness and delicacy in any of them, they’re all like low-
class people. They talk loudly, stamp their feet when they walk, make
noise, cough, but Nikolai always spoke quietly, gently, and if he noticed
that anyone was asleep or praying, he would pass by like a gnat or a
mosquito. His face was tender, pitiful …”
Ieronym sighed deeply and took hold of the cable. We were nearing the
bank. Out of the darkness and silence of the river we gradually floated into
an enchanted kingdom, filled with suffocating smoke, sputtering lamps, and
tumult. People could be seen clearly moving about the pitch barrels. The
flashing of the fire lent their red faces and figures a strange, almost fantastic
expression. Occasionally, among the heads and faces, horses’ muzzles
appeared, motionless, as if cast in red copper.
“They’re about to start the Easter canon …” said Ieronym, “and Nikolai
isn’t here, there’s no one to grasp it … For him there was no writing
sweeter than this canon. He used to grasp every word of it! You’ll be there,
sir, try to grasp what they sing: it will take your breath away!”
“And you won’t be in church?”
“I can’t be, sir … I have to take people across.”
“But won’t they relieve you?”
“I don’t know … I should have been relieved between eight and nine, but
as you see, I haven’t been! … And, to tell the truth, I’d like to be in church
…”
“Are you a monk?”
“Yes, sir … that is, I’m a novice.”
The ferry ran into the bank and stopped. I gave Ieronym a five-kopeck
piece for the ride and jumped onto dry land. At once a cart with a boy and a
sleeping woman drove creaking onto the ferry. Ieronym, faintly colored by
the lights, leaned on the cable, curved his body, and pushed the ferry off…
I took a few steps through the mud, but further on I had to follow a soft,
freshly trampled path. This path led to the dark, cave-like gates of the
monastery, through clouds of smoke, through a disorderly crowd of people,
unharnessed horses, carts, britzkas. It was all creaking, snorting, laughing,
and over it all flashed crimson light and wavy shadows of smoke … A
veritable chaos! And in this turmoil they still found room to load the little
cannon and sell gingerbreads!
There was no less bustle on the other side of the wall, in the churchyard,
but there was more ceremoniousness and order to be observed. Here there
was a smell of juniper and incense. There was loud talk, but no laughter or
snorting. People with kulichi7 and bundles huddled together among the
tombstones and crosses. Obviously many of them had come a long way to
have their kulichi blessed and were now tired. Over the cast-iron slabs that
lay in a strip from the gates to the church door, busy young novices ran,
loudly stamping their boots. In the bell tower there was also scurrying and
shouting.
“What a restless night!” I thought. “How good!”
One would have liked to see this restlessness and sleeplessness in all of
nature, beginning with the night’s darkness and ending with the slabs, the
graveyard crosses, and the trees, under which people bustled about. But
nowhere did the excitement and restlessness tell so strongly as in the
church. At the entrance an irrepressible struggle went on between ebb and
flow. Some went in, others came out and soon went back again, to stand for
a little while and then move again. People shuttle from place to place, loiter,
and seem to be looking for something. The wave starts at the entrance and
passes through the whole church, even disturbing the front rows where the
solid and weighty people stand. To concentrate on prayer is out of the
question. There are no prayers, but there is a sort of massive, childishly
instinctive joy that is only seeking an excuse to burst and pour itself out in
some sort of movement, be it only an unabashed swaying and jostling.
The same extraordinary mobility strikes one’s eye in the paschal service
itself. The royal doors8 in all the chapels are wide open, dense clouds of
incense smoke float in the air around the big candle stand; everywhere one
looks there are lights, brilliance, the sputtering of candles … There are no
readings in this service; the busy and joyful singing goes on till the very
end; after every ode of the canon the clergy change vestments and come out
to cense the church, and this is repeated every ten minutes.
I had just managed to take my place when a wave surged from the front
and threw me back. Before me passed a tall, sturdy deacon with a long red
candle; behind him the gray-haired archimandrite in a golden mitre hurried
with a censer. When they disappeared from view, the crowd pushed me
back to my former place. But ten minutes had not gone by before a new
wave surged and the deacon appeared again. This time he was followed by
the father vicar, the one who, according to Ieronym, was writing a history
of the monastery.
As I merged with the crowd and became infected with the general joyful
excitement, I felt unbearably pained for Ieronym. Why did they not relieve
him? Why did someone less sensitive and impressionable not go to the
ferry?
“Cast thine eyes about thee, O Zion, and behold …” sang the choir, “for
lo! from the West and from the North, and from the sea, and from the East,
as to a light by God illumined, have thy children assembled unto thee …”9
I looked at the faces. They all bore lively, festive expressions; but not
one person listened to or tried to grasp what was being sung, and no one
had their “breath taken away.” Why did they not relieve Ieronym? I could
picture this Ieronym to myself, humbly standing somewhere near the wall,
bending forward and eagerly seizing upon the beauty of the holy phrase. All
that was now slipping past the hearing of the people standing about me, he
would be eagerly drinking in with his sensitive soul, he would get drunk to
the point of ecstasy, of breathlessness, and there would be no happier man
in the whole church. But now he was going back and forth across the dark
river and pining for his dead brother and friend.
A wave surged from behind. A stout, smiling monk, playing with his
beads and glancing over his shoulder, squeezed past me sideways, making
way for some lady in a hat and velvet coat. In the lady’s wake came a
monastery server, holding a chair up over our heads.
I left the church. I wanted to look at the dead Nikolai, the unknown
writer of akathists. I strolled near the churchyard fence where a row of
monks’ cells stretched along the wall, peered through several windows and,
seeing nothing, went back. Now I do not regret not having seen Nikolai;
God knows, perhaps if I had seen him I would have lost the image my
imagination now paints for me. This sympathetic, poetic man, who came at
night to call out to Ieronym and who strewed his akathists with flowers,
stars, and rays of sunlight, lonely and not understood, I picture to myself as
timid, pale, with gentle, meek, and sad features. In his eyes, alongside
intelligence, tenderness should shine, and that barely restrained, childlike
exaltation I could hear in Ieronym’s voice when he quoted the akathists to
me.
When we left the church after the liturgy, it was no longer night.
Morning was coming. The stars had faded and the sky was gray-blue,
sullen. The cast-iron slabs, the tombstones, and the buds on the trees were
covered with dew. There was a sharp feeling of freshness in the air. Outside
the churchyard there was no more of that animation I had seen at night.
Horses and people seemed tired, sleepy, they barely moved, and all that was
left of the pitch barrels was heaps of black ashes. When a man is tired and
wants to sleep, it seems to him that nature is in the same state. It seemed to
me that the trees and young grass were asleep. It seemed that even the bells
did not ring as loudly and gaily as at night. The restlessness was over, and
all that was left of the excitement was a pleasant languor, a desire for sleep
and warmth.
Now I could see the river with both its banks. Hills of light mist hovered
over it here and there. The water breathed out cold and severity. When I
jumped aboard the ferry, someone’s britzka already stood there, and some
twenty men and women. The damp and, as it seemed to me, sleepy cable
stretched far across the wide river and in places disappeared in the white
mist.
“Christ is risen! Is there anybody else?” a quiet voice asked.
I recognized the voice of Ieronym. Now the darkness of night did not
prevent me from seeing the monk. He was a tall, narrow-shouldered man of
about thirty-five, with large, rounded features, half-closed, lazy-looking
eyes, and a disheveled, wedge-shaped beard. He looked extraordinarily sad
and weary.
“They still haven’t relieved you?” I was surprised.
“Me, sir?” he asked, turning his chilled, dew-covered face to me and
smiling. “Now there won’t be anyone to relieve me till morning. They’ll all
go to the father archimandrite’s to break the fast, sir.”10
He and some little peasant in a red fur hat that looked like the bast pots
they sell honey in, leaned on the cable, gave a concerted grunt, and the ferry
moved off.
We floated along, disturbing the lazily rising mist as we went. Everyone
was silent. Ieronym mechanically worked with one hand. For a long time he
looked us over with his meek, dull eyes, then rested his gaze on the rosy,
black-browed face of a young merchant’s wife, who stood next to me on the
ferry and silently shrank away from the mist that embraced her. He did not
take his eyes off her face all the while we crossed.
This prolonged gaze had little of the masculine in it. It seems to me that
in the woman’s face Ieronym was seeking the soft and tender features of his
deceased friend.
APRIL 1886
