Asultry	and	stifling	day.	Not	a	cloud	in	the	sky	…	The	sun-scorched	grass
looks	bleak,	hopeless:	there	may	be	rain,	but	it	will	never	be	green	again	…
The	 forest	 stands	 silent,	 motionless,	 as	 if	 its	 treetops	 were	 looking	 off
somewhere	or	waiting	for	something.
A	 tall,	 narrow-shouldered	 man	 of	 about	 forty,	 in	 a	 red	 shirt,	 patched
gentleman’s	trousers,	 and	 big	 boots,	lazily	 saunters	 along	the	 edge	 of	the
clearing.	He	saunters	down	the	road.	To	his	right	are	green	trees,	to	his	left,
all	the	way	to	the	horizon,	stretches	a	golden	sea	of	ripe	rye	…	His	face	is
red	and	sweaty.	A	white	cap	with	a	straight	jockey’s	visor,	apparently	the
gift	 of	 some	 generous	 squire,	 sits	 dashingly	 on	 his	 handsome	 blond	 head.
Over	his	shoulder	hangs	a	game	bag	with	a	crumpled	black	grouse	in	it.	The
man	is	carrying	a	cocked	double-barreled	shotgun	and	squinting	his	eyes	at
his	old,	skinny	dog,	who	runs	ahead,	sniffing	about	in	the	bushes.	It	is	quiet,
not	a	sound	anywhere	…	Everything	alive	is	hiding	from	the	heat.
“Yegor	Vlasych!”	the	hunter	suddenly	hears	a	soft	voice.
He	 gives	 a	 start	 and	 turns	 around,	 scowling.	 Beside	 him,	 as	 if	 sprung
from	the	ground,	stands	a	pale-faced	woman	of	about	thirty	with	a	sickle	in
her	hand.	She	tries	to	peer	into	his	face	and	smiles	shyly.
“Ah,	 it’s	 you,	 Pelageya!”	 says	 the	 hunter,	 stopping	 and	 slowly	 uncocking	his	gun.	“Hm!	…	How	did	you	turn	up	here?”
“The	women	 from	 our	 village	are	working	 here,	 so	 I’m	 here	with	them
…	Hired	help,	Yegor	Vlasych.”
“So-o	…”	Yegor	Vlasych	grunts	and	slowly	goes	on.
Pelageya	follows	him.	They	go	about	twenty	steps	in	silence.
“I	 haven’t	 seen	 you	 for	a	long	time,	Yegor	Vlasych	…”	 says	Pelageya,
gazing	tenderly	at	the	hunter’s	moving	shoulders	and	shoulder	blades.	“You
stopped	by	our	cottage	for	a	drink	of	water	on	Easter	day,	and	we	haven’t
seen	 you	 since	…	You	 stopped	 for	 a	minute	 on	Easter	 day,	 and	that	God
knows	how	…	in	a	drunken	state	…	You	swore	at	me,	beat	me,	and	left	…
I’ve	been	waiting	and	waiting	…	I’ve	looked	my	eyes	out	waiting	for	you
…	Eh,	Yegor	Vlasych,	Yegor	Vlasych!	If	only	you’d	come	one	little	time!”
“What’s	there	for	me	to	do	at	your	place?”
“There’s	 nothing	 to	 do	 there,	 of	 course,	 just	 …	 anyway	 there’s	 the
household	…	Things	to	 be	 seen	to	…	You’re	the	master	…	Look	at	 you,
shot	a	grouse,	Yegor	Vlasych!	Why	don’t	you	sit	down	and	rest	…”
As	she	says	all	this,	Pelageya	laughs	like	a	fool	and	looks	up	at	Yegor’s
face	…	Her	own	face	breathes	happiness	…
“Sit	 down?	Why	 not	…”	Yegor	 says	in	 an	indifferent	tone	 and	 picks	 a
spot	between	two	pine	saplings.	“Why	are	you	standing?	Sit	down,	too!”
Pelageya	sits	down	a	bit	further	away	in	a	patch	of	sun	and,	ashamed	of
her	 joy,	 covers	 her	 smiling	 mouth	 with	 her	 hand.	 Two	 minutes	 pass	 in
silence.
“If	only	you’d	come	one	little	time,”	Pelageya	says	softly.
“What	for?”	sighs	Yegor,	taking	off	his	cap	and	wiping	his	red	forehead
with	 his	 sleeve.	 “There’s	 no	 need.	 To	 stop	 by	 for	 an	 hour	 or	 two—dally
around,	 get	 you	 stirred	 up—and	my	 soul	can’t	 stand	living	all	the	time	in
the	village	…	You	know	I’m	a	spoiled	man	…	I	want	there	to	be	a	bed,	and
good	tea,	and	delicate	conversation	…	I	want	to	have	all	the	degrees,	and	in
the	 village	there	 you’ve	 got	 poverty,	 soot	…	 I	 couldn’t	 even	live	there	 a
day.	Suppose	they	issued	a	decree	that	I	absolutely	had	to	live	with	you,	I’d
either	 burn	 down	the	 cottage	 or	lay	 hands	 on	myself.	 From	 early	 on	 I’ve
been	spoiled	like	this,	there’s	no	help	for	it.”
“Where	do	you	live	now?”
“At	the	squire	Dmitri	Ivanych’s,	as	a	hunter.	I	furnish	game	for	his	table,
but	it’s	more	like	…	he	keeps	me	because	he’s	pleased	to.”
“It’s	 not	 a	 dignified	thing	to	 do,	Yegor	Vlasych	…	 For	 people	it’s	just
toying,	but	for	you	it’s	like	a	trade	…	a	real	occupation	…”
“You	don’t	understand,	stupid,”	says	Yegor,	dreamily	looking	at	the	sky.
“In	all	your	born	days	you’ve	never	understood	and	never	will	understand
what	 kind	 of	 a	 man	 I	 am	 …	 To	 you,	 I’m	 a	 crazy,	 lost	 man,	 but	 for
somebody	 who	 understands,	 I’m	 the	 best	 shot	 in	 the	 whole	 district.	 The
gentlemen	 feel	 it	 and	 even	 printed	 something	 about	 me	 in	 a	 magazine.
Nobody	can	match	me	in	the	line	of	hunting	…	And	if	I	scorn	your	village
occupations,	it’s	not	because	I’m	spoiled	or	proud.	Right	from	infancy,	you
know,	I’ve	never	known	any	occupation	but	guns	and	dogs.	Take	away	my
gun,	 I’ll	 get	 a	 fishing	 pole,	 take	 away	 the	 fishing	 pole,	 I’ll	 hunt	 barehanded.	Well,	 and	 I	 also	 did	 some	 horse-trading,	 roamed	 around	the	 fairs
whenever	I	had	some	money,	and	you	know	yourself,	if	any	peasant	gets	in
with	hunters	or	horse	traders,	it’s	good-bye	to	the	plough.	Once	a	free	spirit
settles	in	a	man,	there’s	no	getting	it	out	of	him.	It’s	like	when	a	squire	goes
to	 the	 actors	 or	 into	 some	 other	 kind	 of	 artistry,	 then	 for	 him	 there’s	 no
being	 an	 official	 or	 a	landowner.	You’re	 a	woman,	 you	 don’t	 understand,
and	it	takes	understanding.”
“I	understand,	Yegor	Vlasych.”
“Meaning	you	don’t	understand,	since	you’re	about	to	cry	…”
“I	…	I’m	not	crying	…”	says	Pelageya,	turning	away.	“It’s	a	sin,	Yegor
Vlasych!	You	could	spend	at	least	one	little	day	with	me,	poor	woman.	It’s
twelve	years	since	I	married	you,	and	…	and	never	once	was	there	any	love
between	us!	…	I	…	I’m	not	crying.
“Love	…”	Yegor	mutters,	scratching	his	arm.	“There	can’t	be	any	love.
It’s	just	in	name	that	we’re	man	and	wife,	but	is	it	really	so?	For	you	I’m	a
wild	man,	and	 for	me	you’re	a	simple	woman,	with	no	understanding.	Do
we	 make	 a	 couple?	 I’m	 free,	 spoiled,	 loose,	 and	 you’re	 a	 barefoot	 farm
worker,	 you	live	in	 dirt,	 you	 never	 straighten	 your	 back.	 I	think	like	this
about	myself,	that	I’m	first	in	the	line	of	hunting,	but	you	look	at	me	with
pity	…	What	kind	of	couple	are	we?”
“But	we	were	married	in	church,	Yegor	Vlasych!”	Pelageya	sobs.
“Not	 freely…	Did	 you	 forget?	You	can	thank	Count	Sergei	Pavlych	…
and	yourself.	The	count	was	envious	that	 I	was	a	better	shot	than	he	was,
kept	me	drunk	for	a	whole	month,	and	a	drunk	man	can	not	only	be	married
off	 but	 can	 even	 be	 seduced	 into	 a	 different	 faith.	 In	 revenge	 he	 up	 and
married	me	to	you	…	A	huntsman	to	a	cow	girl.	You	could	see	I	was	drunk,
why	did	you	marry	me?	You’re	not	a	serf,	you	could	have	told	him	no!	Of
course,	 a	 cow	 girl’s	 lucky	 to	 marry	 a	 huntsman,	 but	 we	 need	 to	 be
reasonable.	Well,	so	now	you	can	suffer	and	cry.	It’s	a	joke	for	the	count,
but	you	cry	…	beat	your	head	on	the	wall	…”
Silence	 ensues.	 Three	 wild	 ducks	 fly	 over	the	 clearing.	 Yegor	looks	 at
them	and	follows	them	with	his	eyes	until	they	turn	into	three	barely	visible
specks	and	go	down	far	beyond	the	forest.
“How	 do	 you	 live?”	 he	 asks,	 shifting	 his	 eyes	 from	 the	 ducks	 to
Pelageya.
“I	go	out	to	work	now,	and	in	winter	 I	take	a	baby	 from	the	orphanage
and	nurse	him	with	a	bottle.	They	give	me	a	rouble	and	a	half	a	month.”	Soo	…
Again	silence.	From	the	harvested	rows	comes	a	soft	song,	which	breaks
off	at	the	very	beginning.	It	is	too	hot	for	singing	…
“They	say	you	put	up	a	new	cottage	for	Akulina,”	says	Pelageya.
Yegor	is	silent.
“It	means	she’s	after	your	own	heart	…”
“That’s	just	your	luck,	your	fate!”	says	the	hunter,	stretching.	“Bear	with
it,	 orphan.	But,	 anyhow,	 good-bye,	 we’ve	talked	too	much	…	 I’ve	 got	to
make	it	to	Boltovo	by	evening	…”
Yegor	gets	up,	stretches,	shoulders	his	gun.	Pelageya	stands	up.
“And	when	will	you	come	to	the	village?”	she	asks	softly.
“No	point.	I’ll	never	come	sober,	and	when	I’m	drunk	there’s	not	much
profit	for	you.	I	get	angry	when	I’m	drunk	…	Good-bye!”
“Good-bye,	Yegor	Vlasych	…”
Yegor	 puts	 his	 cap	 on	 the	 back	 of	 his	 head	 and,	 clucking	 for	 his	 dog,
continues	on	his	way.	Pelageya	stays	where	she	is	and	looks	at	his	back	…
She	sees	his	moving	shoulder	blades,	his	dashing	head,	his	lazy,	nonchalant
stride,	and	her	eyes	fill	with	sadness	and	a	tender	caress	…	Her	gaze	moves
over	the	tall,	skinny	figure	of	her	husband	and	caresses	and	fondles	it	…	He
seems	to	feel	this	gaze,	stops,	and	looks	back	…	He	is	silent,	but	Pelageya
can	 see	 from	 his	 face,	 from	 his	 raised	 shoulders,	 that	 he	 wants	 to	 say
something	 to	 her.	 She	 timidly	 goes	 up	 to	 him	 and	 looks	 at	 him	 with
imploring	eyes.
“For	you!”	he	says,	turning	away
He	hands	her	a	worn	rouble	and	quickly	walks	off.
“Good-bye,	 Yegor	 Vlasych!”	 she	 says,	 mechanically	 accepting	 the
rouble.
He	 walks	 down	 the	 long	 road	 straight	 as	 a	 stretched-out	 belt	 …	 She
stands	pale,	motionless	as	a	statue,	and	catches	his	every	step	with	her	eyes.
But	now	the	red	color	of	his	shirt	merges	with	the	dark	color	of	his	trousers,
his	steps	can	no	longer	be	seen,	the	dog	is	indistinguishable	from	his	boots.
Only	his	visored	cap	can	still	be	seen,	but	…	suddenly	Yegor	turns	sharply
to	the	right	in	the	clearing	and	the	cap	disappears	into	the	greenery.
“Good-bye,	Yegor	Vlasych!”	Pelageya	whispers	and	stands	on	tiptoe	so
as	at	least	to	see	the	white	cap	one	more	time.