Before	the	examining	magistrate	stands	a	puny,	exceedingly	scrawny	little
peasant	in	a	calico	 shirt	and	 patched	trousers.	His	 face	is	 overgrown	with
hair	 and	 eaten	 with	 pockmarks,	 and	 his	 eyes,	 barely	 visible	 through	 his
thick,	beetling	brows,	have	an	expression	of	sullen	sternness.	On	his	head	a
whole	mop	of	long-uncombed,	matted	hair,	which	endows	him	with	a	still
greater	spiderlike	sternness.	He	is	barefoot.
“Denis	Grigoriev!”	the	magistrate	begins.	“Come	closer	and	answer	my
questions.	 On	the	 seventh	 day	 of	 July	instant	the	 railroad	 watchman	 Ivan
Semyonovich	 Akinfov,	 proceeding	 along	 the	 line	 in	 the	 morning,	 at	 the
ninety-first	 mile	 post	 found	 you	 unscrewing	 one	 of	the	 nuts	 by	 means	 of
which	the	rails	are	fastened	to	the	ties.	Here	is	that	nut!	…	With	which	nut
he	also	detained	you.	Is	that	how	it	went?”
“Wha?”
“Did	it	all	go	as	Akinfov	explains?”
“Sure	it	did.”
“Good.	Now,	why	were	you	unscrewing	the	nut?”
“Wha?”
“Drop	 this	 ‘wha?’	 of	 yours	 and	 answer	 the	 question:	 why	 were	 you
unscrewing	the	nut?”
“If	 I	 didn’t	 need	it,	 I	wouldn’t	 have	 been	 unscrewing	it,”	croaks	Denis,
looking	askance	at	the	ceiling.
“And	why	did	you	need	this	nut?”
“That	nut	there?	We	make	sinkers	out	of	’em	…”
“We	who?”
“Us	folk	…	the	Klimovo	peasants,	that	is.”
“Listen,	brother,	don’t	play	the	idiot	here.	Talk	sense.	There’s	no	point	in
lying	about	sinkers!”
“Never	lied	in	all	my	born	days,	so	now	 I’m	lying	…”	mumbles	Denis,
blinking	his	eyes.	“Could	we	do	without	a	sinker,	Your	Honor?	If	you	put	a
live	worm	or	a	minnow	on	a	hook,	how’ll	it	ever	go	down	without	a	sinker?
Lying	…”	Denis	smirks.	“Who	the	devil	needs	live	bait	if	it	floats	up	top!
Your	perch,	your	pike,	your	burbot	always	bites	on	the	bottom,	and	if	the
bait	floats	up	top,	it’s	only	good	for	catching	gobies,	and	even	that’s	rare	…
Gobies	don’t	live	in	our	river	…	It’s	a	fish	that	likes	space.”
“What	are	you	telling	me	about	gobies	for?”
“Wha?	But	you	asked	yourself!	The	gentry	here	fish	the	same	way,	too.
Not	 even	the	 merest	lad	 would	 go	 fishing	 without	 a	 sinker.	 Of	 course,	if
somebody’s	got	no	sense	at	all,	he’ll	try	and	fish	without	a	sinker.	A	fool	is
as	a	fool	does	…”
“So	 you	 tell	 me	 that	 you	 were	 unscrewing	 this	 nut	 in	 order	 to	 make	 a
sinker	out	of	it?”
“What	else?	Can’t	play	knucklebones	with	it!”
“But	you	could	use	a	bit	of	lead	for	a	sinker,	a	bullet	…	a	nail	of	some
sort…”
“You	won’t	 find	lead	lying	about,	 you’ve	 got	to	 buy	it,	and	a	 nail’s	 no
good.	There	nothing	better	than	a	nut	…	 It’s	heavy,	and	it’s	got	a	hole	in
it.”
“He	pretends	to	be	such	a	fool!	As	if	he	was	born	yesterday	or	fell	from
the	moon!	Don’t	 you	 understand,	 dunderhead,	what	this	 unscrewing	leads
to?	If	the	watchman	hadn’t	spotted	it,	a	train	might	have	gone	off	the	rails,
people	might	have	been	killed!	You’d	have	killed	people!”
“God	forbid,	Your	Honor!	Why	kill?	Are	we	heathens	or	villains	of	some
kind?	Thank	the	Lord,	my	good	sir,	we’ve	lived	our	life	without	any	killing,
such	thoughts	never	even	enter	our	head	…	Queen	of	Heaven,	save	us	and
have	mercy	…	How	could	you,	sir!”
“And	 what	 do	 you	 think	 causes	 train	 accidents?	 Unscrew	 two	 or	 three
nuts,	and	you’ve	got	yourself	an	accident!”
Denis	smirks	and	squints	his	eyes	mistrustfully	at	the	magistrate.
“Well!	All	these	 years	the	whole	 village	 has	 been	 unscrewing	 nuts	 and
the	Lord’s	 preserved	 us,	 so	 now	it’s	 an	 accident	…	 killing	 people	…	 If	 I
took	away	the	 rail	 or,	let’s	 say,	 put	a	log	across	the	tracks,	well,	then	the
train	might	go	off,	but	this	…	pah!	a	nut!”
“But	you	must	understand,	the	nuts	fasten	the	rail	to	the	tie!”
“We	understand	that	…	We	don’t	unscrew	all	of	them	…	we	leave	some
…	We	don’t	do	it	mindlessly	…	we	understand	…”
Denis	yawns	and	makes	a	cross	over	his	mouth.
“Last	year	a	train	went	off	the	rails	here,”	says	the	magistrate,	“now	I	see
why	…”
“Beg	pardon,	sir?”
“Now,	 I	 said,	 I	 see	 why	 a	 train	 went	 off	 the	 rails	 last	 year	 …	 I
understand!”
“That’s	what	 you	 get	 educated	 for,	 so	 you’ll	 understand,	most	merciful
judges	…	The	Lord	knew	who	to	give	understanding	to	…	And	here	you’ve
considered	how	and	what,	but	a	watchman’s	the	same	as	a	peasant,	he’s	got
no	understanding,	he	just	grabs	you	by	the	scruff	of	the	neck	and	drags	you
off…	 Reason	 first,	 and	 then	 drag!	 Like	 they	 say—peasant	 head,	 peasant
thoughts	…	Write	this	down,	too,	Your	Honor,	that	he	hit	me	twice	in	the
teeth	and	the	chest.”
“When	they	searched	your	place,	they	found	a	second	nut	…	When	and
where	did	you	unscrew	it?”
“You	mean	the	one	that	was	under	the	little	red	trunk?”
“I	 don’t	 know	 where	it	 was,	 I	 only	 know	they	 found	it.	When	 did	 you
unscrew	it?”
“I	didn’t	unscrew	it,	it	was	Ignashka,	the	son	of	one-eyed	Semyon,	gave
it	to	me.	I	mean	the	one	that	was	under	the	little	trunk,	and	the	one	that	was
in	the	sledge	in	the	yard	I	unscrewed	along	with	Mitrofan.”
“Which	Mitrofan?”
“Mitrofan	Petrov	…	You’ve	never	heard	of	him?	He	makes	nets	and	sells
them	 to	 the	 gentry.	 He	 needs	 a	 lot	 of	 these	 same	 nuts.	 Reckon	 maybe	 a
dozen	for	each	net	…”
“Listen	 …	 Article	 one	 thousand	 and	 eighty-one	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code
says	 that	 any	 deliberate	 damage	 to	 the	 railways,	 in	 case	 it	 endangers	 the
transport	 availing	 itself	 of	 those	 railways,	 and	 with	 the	 perpetrator’s
knowledge	that	the	consequences	thereof	will	be	an	accident—understand?
knowledge!	 And	 you	 couldn’t	 help	 knowing	 what	 this	 unscrewing	 would
lead	to—will	be	punishable	by	a	term	at	hard	labor.”
“Of	 course,	 you	 know	 best	 …	 We’re	 ignorant	 folk	 …	 what	 do	 we
understand?”
“You	understand	everything!	You’re	lying	and	dissembling!”
“Why	lie?	Ask	in	the	village,	if	you	don’t	believe	me	…	Without	a	sinker
you	 only	 get	 bleak.	 You	 won’t	 even	 get	 gudgeon,	 the	 worst	 of	 the	 lot,
without	a	sinker.”
“Next	you’ll	be	talking	about	gobies	again!”	the	magistrate	smiles.
“We’ve	got	no	gobies	here	…	 If	we	 fish	on	top	without	a	sinker,	using
butterflies	for	bait,	we	get	chub,	and	even	that’s	rare.”
“Well,	be	quiet	…”
Silence	ensues.	Denis	shifts	from	one	foot	to	the	other,	stares	at	the	table
covered	with	green	baize,	and	blinks	his	eyes	strenuously,	as	if	what	he	sees
before	him	is	not	baize	but	the	sun.	The	magistrate	is	writing	rapidly.
“Can	I	go?”	asks	Denis,	after	some	silence.
“No.	I	must	put	you	under	arrest	and	send	you	to	prison.”
Denis	stops	blinking	and,	raising	his	thick	eyebrows,	looks	questioningly
at	the	official.
“That	is,	how	do	you	mean—to	prison?	Your	Honor!	I	haven’t	got	time,	I
have	to	go	to	the	fair,	and	also	get	three	roubles	from	Yegor	for	the	lard	…”
“Quiet,	don’t	disturb	me	…”
“To	 prison	 …	 If	 it	 was	 for	 something,	 I’d	 go,	 but	 like	 this	 …	 for	 a
fleabite	…	Why?	Seems	 I	didn’t	steal,	 I	didn’t	 fight	…	And	if	you’ve	got
doubts	about	the	arrears,	Your	Honor,	don’t	believe	the	headman	…	Better
ask	mister	permanent	member	…	An	ungodly	fellow,	that	headman	…”
“Quiet!”
“I’m	quiet	as	it	is	…”	mutters	Denis.	“I’ll	swear	an	oath	the	headman’s
accounts	are	a	pack	of	lies	…	We’re	three	brothers:	Kuzma	Grigoriev,	that
is,	and	Yegor	Grigoriev,	and	me,	Denis	Grigoriev…”
“You’re	 disturbing	me	…	 Hey,	 Semyon!”	 shouts	the	magistrate.	 “Take
him	away!”
“We’re	three	brothers,”	mutters	Denis,	as	two	stalwart	soldiers	take	him
and	 lead	 him	 from	 the	 chamber.	 “Brother’s	 not	 answerable	 for	 brother.
Kuzma	 doesn’t	 pay	 and	 you,	 Denis,	 have	 to	 answer	…	 Judges!	 Our	 late
master,	the	 general,	 died,	may	 he	 rest	in	 peace,	 otherwise	 he’d	 show	 you
judges	 something	…	 You’ve	 got	 to	 judge	 knowingly,	 not	 just	 anyhow…
Give	a	whipping,	even,	but	so	as	it’s	for	a	reason,	in	all	fairness	…”